# traffic_light_controller
Traffic Light Systems : A traffic light system is an electronic device that assigns right of way at an intersectionorcrossing or street crossing by means of displaying the standard red, yellowandgreencolored indications. In addition, it also works in conjunction with pedestriandisplaystoassign pedestrian crossing right of way. A traffic light, also known as traffic signal, stop light, stop-and-go lights, is a signalingdevicepositioned at a road intersection, pedestrian crossing, or other location in order toindicatewhen it is safe to drive, ride, or walk using a universal colour code. Nowadays, A red light meant traffic in all directions had to stop. A yellow light meant cross-town traffic would have to slow and, A green light would to go or proceed. The difficulty in understanding this confusing color sequence was compoundedbyneighboring towns using another system. The development of an intelligent control structure ensures an optimal solution for all participants in the transportationandroadtraffic system. There are different ways controlling road intersections. In the simplest casesthe right-hand rule or, if the traffic is higher, a round about or the signal of a policemancanhelp steer the traffic. However, especially in big cities, in the complicated cases when the roads intheintersection have several lanes, the use of traffic lights cannot be avoided. Anadditional issue arises when in the intersection not only roads but also railroad tracks take part, whatoften occurs in suburban traffic situations. The most common way to handle this typeofintersection is the conventional cyclic lights control. In more enhanced control, thetrafficin different directions is monitored by sensors and the signals thus obtainedcontrol thetraffic lights. In this method the control is adapting to the traffic. The general problemisthe huge number of variables and the need for large computing efforts. Benefit of Traffic Light Controller :When properly used, traffic control signals are important devices for the control of vehiclesin road. They assign the right-of-way to a choice of traffic movements and therebydeeplyinfluence traffic flow. Traffic control signals that are properly desiggned, located, operated, and maintained will have one or more of the following advantages :  Provide orderly movement of traffic.  Minimize completing movement.  Coordinated for continuous movement.  Provide driver confidence by assigning right way traffic control signals are oftenconsidered, a cure for all traffic problems at intersections.This belief has led to traffic control signals being installed at many locations wheretheyarenot needed, adversely affecting the safety and efficiency of vehicular, bicycle, andpedestrian traffic. Traffic control signals, even when justified by traffic androadwayconditions, can be ill-designed, ineffectively placed, improperly operated, or poorlymaintained. While traffic signals can help in locations where they are justified andinstalledproperly, they also have disadvantages. There will always be some disadvantages even if the signal is justified. Most traffic signalswill have the following components or part: 
 Main display with red, yellow and green lights.
 Traffic signal cabinet containing the traffic signal controller and Vehicle Detectionsystems.
 Inductive loops or sensors.
Traffic jamming is a critical predicament in many of the cities and towns all over theworld. Traffic congestion has been causing many setbacks and challenges in the major andmostoccupied cities all over the globe. This traffic jam directly impacts the productivityof theworkers, traders, suppliers and in all affecting the market and raising the prices of thecommodities in a way light. The problem of heavy jam is happened because of never configure the level of jamineachway and set the delay time. Another problem represents when there is no jam, but thewaiting still continues. The solution for these problems is to determine the level of jamand set the delay time. This problem need of evaluation of the traffic policeman, andthenthere is need for manual control of the traffic. The target of this paper is to propose system provide solution for all above problemswithleast possible cost. Traffic light controller (TLC) can be implementedusingmicrocontroller, FPGA, and ASIC design. FPGA has many advantages over microcontroller, some of these advantages are; the speed, number of input/output ports and performancewhich are all very important in TLC design, at the same time ASIC designis moreexpensive than FPGA. Nowadays, FPGA becomes one of the most successful of today’s technologiesfordeveloping the systems which require a real time operation. FPGA is a re-configurableintegrated circuit that consists of two dimensional arrays of logic blocks andflip-flopswith an electrically programmable interconnection between logic blocks. The reconfiguration property enables fast prototyping and updates for hardwaredeviceseven after market launch. Most of the TLCs implemented on FPGA are simple onesthathave been implemented as examples of Finite State Machine (FSM). The Verilog language has been selected for programming the FPGA to fill two importantneeds in the design process.  Firstly, it gives full description of the structure of a design that is howit isdecomposed into sub-designs, and how those sub-designs are interconnected.  Secondly, it allows simulating the design before starting the manufacturing. Accordingly, the designers can quickly compare alternatives and test for correctnesswithout the delay and expense of hardware prototyping Benefits of Using Verilog HDL (Hardware Description Language) : Verilog is a widely used Hardware Description Language (HDL) for designingdigital circuits. It can also be used for modeling analog circuits. Verilog is a descriptive languagethat describes a relationship between signals in a circuit. A Verilog model describes a unit of digital hardware in terms of :  Interconnections of other hardware unit whose models prescribe their behavior inasimulation.  Behavioral / procedural algorithms that abstractly describe input/output behaviorthat could be personified in a hardware unit. Hardware description language (HDL) is divided by two types, Verilog and VHDL(VHSIC–Very High Speed Integrated Circuit Hardware Description Language). Bothhaveitsadvantages and its disadvantage. In this project, Verilog HDL was chosen because it’s used for synthesis of logic circuits(synthesizable code), used for verification purposes of a circuit (can be analog or digital ormixed signal), can be used by combining synthesis & verification (synthesizable&behavioral code) and it used for netlist representation of a synthesizable circuit (structural code). The advantages using Verilog HDL are shown below : 
 Easy to write.  Easy to understand as it similar to C program. 
 Easier to learn compared with VHDL.
